#labels Featured
=== What do I do with this? ===

Good question. As of version 0.1.3 there is a "Free Flight" mission which loads when Exoflight starts. This features the Space Wagon, which is good for just puttering around. Use the arrow keys (or joystick) for attitude control, and Shift+arrow keys for translation control. Pgup/Home bank left and right, and Shift+Pgup/Home thrust forward/back. Shift+1, Shift+5, and Shift+0 are 0/50%/100% throttle respectively. The function keys F1-F6 take you through the various views, most of which you can drag with the mouse, or press "C" to cycle through the camera/cockpit views.

But the best way to learn your way around the simulator right now is to try the Gemini Missions (Ctrl-N). These are four missions that take you through the phases of launch, interception, docking, and reentry. Just follow the on-screen directions.

You could also try the `File | Custom Mission` (the menu pops down from the top in Windows) or `File | Set Location` to place your to place a spaceship at an arbitrary location in the Solar System and mess around.

If you're astrodynamically-inclined, you could also take a shot at making custom missions with the [http://code.google.com/p/exoflight/wiki/SequencerLanguage Exoflight Sequencer Language] -- see the `missions` and `programs` directory for detailed (the source code may help here until we get all this doc'ed)

=== I don't see files automatically getting downloaded after startup. ===

If you are behind a proxy your best bet is to download them manually. Go to the [http://code.google.com/p/exoflight/downloads/list Downloads] tab and download all the .zip files with the "Required" tag. Then unzip them all to the `C:\Program Files\Exoflight` directory (on Windows) or the `Exoflight.app/Contents/Resources` directory (Mac OS X).

If you create a file called `.X.tag` (where `X` is the name of the zip file) it won't try to download them again.

=== I don't see an Exoflight shortcut in the Start Menu, just the Uninstaller. ===

This is a problem with Windows XP and version 0.1.2, it will be fixed. In the meantime just start `C:\Program Files\Exoflight\Exoflight.exe` manually or create a shortcut to it.
 